THE AMAZON RIVER IS AN
EXTRAORDINARY FORCE OF NATURE.
STRETCHING OVER
6,500 KILOMETERS
ACROSS THE SOUTH
AMERICAN CONTINENT,
IT FEEDS THE LARGEST
TROPICAL RAINFOREST ON EARTH.
ITS WATERS CONTAIN A
GREATER VARIETY OF FISH
THAN THE ENTIRE
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
NOT ONLY IS THIS THE
RICHEST RIVER ON EARTH,
IT IS ALSO
THE MIGHTIEST.
UP TO 100 METERS DEEP
AND 40 KILOMETERS WIDE,
IT CARRIES MORE WATER
THAN ANY RIVER IN THE WORLD.
THIS PRECIOUS RESOURCE
HAS NEVER BEEN TAMED BY MAN.
FROM SOURCE TO SEA, NOT A SINGLE
BRIDGE CROSSES ITS WATERS,
NOT A SINGLE DAM
HOLDS ITS FLOW.
BUT WHILE THE RIVER
CANNOT BE CONTROLLED,
IT COULD BE
DESTROYED.
TODAY, COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT IS KILLING
THE WILDERNESS WHICH
PROTECTS THE AMAZON
AND ITS FUTURE
HANGS IN THE BALANCE.
THE CRUCIAL QUESTION NOW IS,
HOW LONG CAN THIS GREAT RIVER
CONTINUE
TO RUN WILD?
THE AMAZON RIVER HAS
IMMENSE POWER OVER
EVERYTHING THAT LIVES
NEAR ITS WATERS.
THOUGH IT FLOWS THROUGH ONE
OF THE MOST REMOTE REGIONS
ON EARTH, SEVEN MILLION
PEOPLE HAVE MADE THEIR HOME
ON THE RIVER BANKS.
FROM ISOLATED VILLAGE
TO BUSTLING METROPOLIS,
NONE OF THOSE
WHO LIVE NEAR IT
CAN CONTROL THE
FORCE OF THE AMAZON...
THEY HAVE SIMPLY ADAPTED TO A
LIFE DETERMINED BY THE RIVER.
THE POWER OF ITS WATERS AND THE
REMOTE LANDSCAPE THROUGH WHICH
IT TRAVELS HAVE FOR CENTURIES
PROTECTED THE AMAZON FROM MAN.
UNTIL RECENTLY, THIS
RAINFOREST WAS BELIEVED TO BE
ONE OF THE WORLD'S MOST
STABLE ENVIRONMENTS.
BUT AGGRESSIVE COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT IS DESTROYING THE
JUNGLE AND THE PROTECTION IT
OFFERS IS BEING STRIPPED AWAY.
TODAY, THE DELICATE
ECO-BALANCE OF THE REGION
IS BEING PUSHED TO THE
POINT OF NO RETURN.
THE AMAZON RIVER, ITS
WILDLIFE AND ITS PEOPLE
ARE VULNERABLE
AS NEVER BEFORE.
FROM ITS PERUVIAN HEADWATERS
TO ITS BRAZILIAN DELTA,
THE AMAZON RIVER CUTS
ACROSS SOUTH AMERICA.
ITS RIVER BASIN, THE
LARGEST IN THE WORLD,
IS RIDDLED WITH A
THOUSAND TRIBUTARIES
ALL FLOWING TOWARD THE MAIN
ARTERY OF THE AMAZON ITSELF.
WHILE ITS GLACIAL SOURCE LIES
HIGH IN THE ANDEAN MOUNTAINS
OF PERU, THE AMAZON
STORY PROPER BEGINS HERE,
OVER 1,800 KILOMETERS
DOWNSTREAM,
WHERE THE UCAYALI AND
MARANON RIVERS MEET.
ONLY AT THIS CONFLUENCE IN
THE PERUVIAN RAINFOREST
DOES THE RIVER TAKE
ON THE NAME "AMAZON".
A FEW KILOMETERS DOWNSTREAM,
MARISCAL CASTILLA
IS ONE OF THE FIRST
VILLAGES ON THE AMAZON.
THE PERUVIAN NAME FOR
THESE VILLAGES IS RIBERENOS,
LITERALLY MEANING
"RIVER PEOPLE".
OF SPANISH AND INDIAN DESCENT,
THE RIBERENOS ARE NOT
INDIGENOUS TO THE
RAINFOREST BUT HAVE
ADAPTED TO LIVE AT THE WATERS'
EDGE AND DEVELOPED AN
INTIMATE RELATIONSHIP WITH
THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
COPING WITH THE SHIFTING WATERS
IS PART AND PARCEL OF LIFE HERE,
PARTICULARLY DURING THE
RIVER'S SEASONAL FLOODS.
IN THE WET SEASON, INCREASED
RAINFALL OVER THE FORESTS
DRAMATICALLY INCREASES THE
AMOUNT OF WATER IN THE RIVER.
IN A TYPICAL FLOOD, LEVELS
RISE BY UP TO 20 METERS
AND THE AREA COVERED
BY THE RIVER TRIPLES.
AT THIS TIME, THE AMAZON CARRIES
SO MUCH EXTRA WATER THAT THE
SOUTH AMERICAN CONTINENT
SINKS SEVERAL CENTIMETERS
UNDER THE WEIGHT AND RISES
AGAIN AS THE WATERS RECEDE.
IT IS THIS IMMENSE
FLUCTUATION IN FLOW
WHICH MAKES THE AMAZON
IMPOSSIBLE TO CONTROL.
AND SO THE RIBERENOS HAVE NO
CHOICE BUT TO ADOPT A LIFESTYLE
WHICH ACCOMMODATES THE
RIVER'S EXTREME FLOODS.
THEIR HOUSES ARE DESIGNED
FOR THIS PURPOSE,
BUILT ON STILTS TO ALLOW
FLOOD WATER TO FLOW BENEATH.
BUT THIS ISN'T ALWAYS
ENOUGH TO KEEP THEM SAFE...
FOR NOT ONLY DOES THE AMAZON
FLOOD, IT CHANGES COURSE
SO DRAMATICALLY THAT A VILLAGE
COULD SUDDENLY FIND ITSELF
AT THE BOTTOM OF THE
NEW RIVER CHANNEL.
MARIA PITZANGO HAS LIVED IN
MARISCAL CASTILLA ALL HER LIFE.
IN THE LAST TEN YEARS SHE
HAS HAD TO REBUILD HER HOME
SEVERAL TIMES TO AVOID
THE ROAMING WATERS.
TRANSLATOR: THE RIVER STARTED
TO ERODE THE RIVER BANK.
BEFORE THIS PLATFORM
WAS WASHED AWAY
I ORDERED A NEW HOUSE
TO BE BUILT OVER THERE.
I HAD TO MOVE THERE
BEFORE MY HOUSE DISAPPEARED
WITH THE RIVER BANK.
>>THE HUGE VOLUME OF WATER IN
THE AMAZON MEANS IT CAN EASILY
CHANGE ITS COURSE THROUGH THE
FLAT TERRAIN AND SOFT SOILS.
WHEN THE RIVER MOVES
THE PEOPLE HAVE NO CHOICE
BUT TO MOVE WITH IT.
YET, THE RIBERENOS LIVE HERE
NOT DESPITE BUT BECAUSE OF
THE RIVER'S EVER
SHIFTING FLOOD PATTERNS.
FOR IT IS THIS WHICH
MAKES THE RIVERBANKS,
OR VARZEA, AS
THEY ARE KNOWN,
THE RICHEST TRACTS OF LAND
IN THE WHOLE RAINFOREST.
TRANSLATOR: HERE
I'VE GOT THE TOMATOES,
THE CHICLAYO AND THE
POTATOES WHICH WE EAT.
AND HERE ARE
THE CUCUMBERS.
WE ALSO GROW
YUCCA FOR FOOD.
>>THE MAGIC INGREDIENT WHICH
MAKES THIS LAND SO FERTILE
IS SILT WASHED DOWN FROM
THE ANDES MOUNTAINS
SUSPENDED IN THE MURKY
BROWN WATERS OF THE RIVER.
WHEN THE AMAZON FLOODS, THIS
MINERAL RICH SILT IS DISTRIBUTED
OVER THE EARTH, RENDERING THE
GROUND REMARKABLY PRODUCTIVE.
THESE VARZEA FLOOD
PLAINS CAN SUPPORT
CONTINUOUS AGRICULTURE,
ALBEIT ON A SMALL SCALE.
TRANSLATOR: THIS YEAR THE
RIVER HAS REPLENISHED THE MUD
AND THAT'S WHY MY
RICE IS OVER THERE.
LAST YEAR THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN
AND MY RICE FAILED TO GROW.
THIS TIME THERE
WAS MORE MUD.
IT CAME UP TO HERE
TO IRRIGATE THE RICE.
>>TO MAINTAIN THE FERTILITY OF
THE SOIL, THE RIBERENOS ONLY
CLEAR SMALL PATCHES OF
LAND AT A TIME AND GROW MANY
DIFFERENT VARIETIES OF
CROPS IN THE SAME AREA.
AS WELL AS PROVIDING FERTILE
SOIL, THE RIVER ALSO PROVIDES
FISH TO EAT AND THE LOCALS
HAVE DEVELOPED UNIQUE WAYS
OF CATCHING THEM.
THESE MEN ARE COLLECTING
LEAVES FROM THE HUACA PLANT
FOR FISHING.
FIRST THE HUACA LEAVES ARE
CRUSHED TO RELEASE THEIR JUICES.
NEXT, THE CRUSHED LEAVES
ARE TRANSFERRED TO A BASKET
AND DIPPED SEVERAL
TIMES IN ONE OF THE MANY
RIVER POOLS NEAR
MARISCAL CASTILLA VILLAGE.
AS THE HUACA POISON IS
RELEASED, IT DEPLETES
THE OXYGEN IN THE WATER,
MAKING THE FISH DROWSY
AND FORCING THEM TO
THE SURFACE FOR AIR.
ONCE THEY ARE WITHIN REACH
OF THE RIBERENOS' SPEARS,
THEY ARE EASY PREY.
TO SURVIVE ON THE RIVER BANK,
THE RIBERENOS HAVE COME TO
DEVELOP A DEEP UNDERSTANDING
OF THE RIVER AND TO ACCEPT
THAT IT HOLDS ABSOLUTE
POWER OVER THEIR DESTINY.
BUT SUBSISTENCE FARMING IS A
PRECARIOUS EXISTENCE AND AN
INCREASING NUMBER OF RIBERENOS
ARE LEAVING THE SECLUSION
OF THEIR VARZEA VILLAGES
IN SEARCH OF A BETTER LIFE.
MANY END UP HERE, 125
KILOMETERS DOWNSTREAM
IN THE CITY OF IQUITOS,
THE JUNGLE METROPOLIS.
PERCHED AT THE JUNCTION
WHERE THE AMAZON MEETS
TWO MAJOR TRIBUTARIES,
IQUITOS HAS 400,000 RESIDENTS.
TODAY, SOME 70% OF THE
POPULATION OF THE AMAZON BASIN
LIVES IN CITIES
LIKE THESE.
EVEN IN THE JUNGLE, URBANIZATION
IS A GROWING TREND.
SURROUNDED BY WATER AND
RAINFOREST, IQUITOS IS THE
LARGEST CITY IN THE WORLD
THAT CAN'T BE REACHED BY ROAD.
TRAVEL WITHIN THE CITY
IS MOSTLY BY RICKSHAW.
TRAVEL TO AND FROM THE
CITY IS BY PLANE AND BOAT.
EVEN THOUGH IT IS OVER 3,700
KILOMETERS FROM THE SEA,
IQUITOS IS SAVED
FROM TOTAL ISOLATION
BY THE WATER HIGHWAY
THAT IS THE AMAZON RIVER.
THIS WATERWAY PROVIDES
THE CITY WITH A PRECIOUS
COMMERCIAL LINK TO
THE OUTSIDE WORLD.
BUT THIS LINK
COMES AT A PRICE.
AT JUST 106 METERS ABOVE SEA
LEVEL, THE RESIDENTS OF IQUITOS
HAVE NO MEANS OF CONTROLLING
THE WATERS WHICH SURROUND THEM.
LIFE HERE IS LIVED AT
THE MERCY OF THE RIVER.
THE SUBURB OF BELEN
IS A PERFECT EXAMPLE.
DURING THE WET SEASON BELEN
COULD ONLY BE REACHED BY BOAT.
MANY OF THE HOUSES
HERE ARE BUILT TO FLOAT
ON THE
RISING WATERS.
HOUSES THAT DON'T FLOAT ARE
DESIGNED TO BE FLOODED.
FAMILIES WHO LIVE IN THESE
TWO-STORY HOMES MOVE THEIR
POSSESSIONS TO THE UPPER
LEVELS DURING THE WET SEASON,
ALLOWING THE GROUND FLOOR
TO BE SWALLOWED UP BY WATER.
WHEN THE FLOODS
HAVE RECEDED
THE FAMILY CLAIM BACK
THAT HALF OF THEIR HOME
ONLY TO GIVE IT OVER TO
THE RIVER AGAIN NEXT YEAR.
MOST OF THE 40,000 PEOPLE
IN BELEN LIVE IN POVERTY.
MANY ARE MIGRANTS WHO HAVE
LEFT REMOTE RIVER SETTLEMENTS
IN SEARCH OF A
BETTER LIFE IN THE CITY.
BUT WITH HIGH
UNEMPLOYMENT
AND WITHOUT LAND TO
GROW THEIR OWN FOOD,
THEY STRUGGLE TO
FEED THEIR FAMILIES,
LIVING IN CRAMPED HOUSING
WITH NO ELECTRICITY
AND NO
RUNNING WATER.
UNDER THESE CONDITIONS,
THE DAMP AND HUMID
ATMOSPHERE OF THE
AMAZON TAKES ITS TOLL.
MALARIA AND RESPIRATORY
DISEASES ARE COMMONPLACE.
WHEN PEOPLE BECOME ILL
THEIR FIRST PORT OF CALL
IS PASAJE PAQUITO,
OR MEDICINE LANE.
LOCATED IN A PART OF BELEN
WHICH DOESN'T FLOOD,
THIS MARKET STREET
SELLS NOTHING BUT
LOCAL PLANT AND
ANIMAL REMEDIES.
BLANCA SALDANIA OWNS HER
OWN STALL ON MEDICINE LANE,
SELLING HOMEMADE
POTIONS.
TRANSLATOR: HERE
I'VE GOT IPURU.
IT'S COMMON IN THIS
AREA OF THE AMAZON.
THIS GROWS NEAR THE RIVER
AND THE SURROUNDING AREA.
IT'S GOOD FOR COLDS AND
IMPOTENCE, FOR MEN ESPECIALLY.
THE ACHIOTE ALSO
GROWS BY THE RIVER.
YOU TAKE IT IN TEA FOR
PROSTATE PROBLEMS
AND TO REDUCE
INFLAMMATION.
>>IT'S NOT JUST THE LOCALS WHO
RECOGNIZE THE HEALTH BENEFITS
OF THE LOCAL PRODUCE.
A QUARTER OF ALL PHARMACEUTICAL
DRUGS ARE DERIVED FROM
PLANTS WHICH ONLY GROW IN
THE DELICATE ECOSYSTEM
SUPPORTED BY
THE AMAZON RIVER.
BUT UNREFINED REMEDIES ARE NO
MATCH FOR THE KILLER DISEASES
WHICH BLIGHT THE
RESIDENTS OF BELEN.
WHEN LOCAL MEDICINES
HAVE FAILED,
THEIR ONLY HOPE IS A
CHARITY-RUN MEDICAL CENTER.
RONALD GONZALEZ IS A DOCTOR WHO
WORKS AT THIS DROP-IN CLINIC
FOR THE POOREST
RESIDENTS OF BELEN.
THERE ARE ALWAYS MORE PATIENTS
THAN HE HAS TIME TO SEE.
THIS CHILD IS
FIVE YEARS OLD.
HE HAS BEEN BROUGHT TO
THE CLINIC BY HIS MOTHER
WHO'S WORRIED ABOUT
HIS PERSISTENT COUGH.
DR. GONZALEZ BELIEVES
THAT THE CHILD'S CONDITION
IS DIRECTLY CAUSED BY
LIVING NEAR THE RIVER.
TRANSLATOR: THE CHILD
HAS A CHEST COMPLAINT.
HE'S GOT ACUTE BRONCHIAL
OBSTRUCTION SYNDROME.
ASTHMA, IN SHORT, AND SO
HE WILL BE GIVEN TREATMENT.
THIS ACUTE BRONCHIAL OBSTRUCTION
SYNDROME IS MORE VIRULENT
WHEN CHILDREN LIVE IN VERY
HUMID AREAS SUCH AS HERE,
CLOSE TO THE RIVER.
EXCESSIVE HUMIDITY IN
THE MORNING AND AT NIGHT
CLOSES THE BRONCHI SO
THAT HE CAN'T BREATHE EASILY.
HE COUGHS A LOT
AND CAN'T SLEEP.
>>BUT PERHAPS THE GREATEST
DANGER TO PEOPLES' HEALTH
IS NOT THE AIR BUT
THE WATER ITSELF
AS THE RIVER IN IQUITOS IS
INCREASINGLY POLLUTED.
IN THESE SHANTY TOWNS
THERE IS NO SEWER SYSTEM
TO DEAL WITH THE
WASTE PRODUCED.
LATRINES EMPTY INTO
THE RIVER CANALS.
DURING THE DRY SEASON PEOPLE
WALK THE PLANK ALONG THE WOODEN
PATHWAYS TO AVOID THE HUMAN
EXCREMENT WHICH FLOWS BENEATH.
DURING THE FLOODS, THE WASTE
GETS CARRIED BY THE RIVER
INTO PEOPLES' HOUSES.
WHAT'S MORE, THE POOREST
RESIDENTS OF IQUITOS
HAVE NO PIPED
DRINKING SUPPLY.
THEY'RE FORCED TO USE THE
UNTREATED RIVER OR RAINWATER
FOR THEIR DAILY USE -
TO DISASTROUS EFFECT.
CHILD MORTALITY RATES IN
BELEN ARE SHOCKINGLY HIGH.
TRANSLATOR: INTESTINAL
INFECTIONS LIKE DYSENTERY
AND NON-DYSENTERY DIARRHEA
ARE CAUSED MAINLY BECAUSE
PEOPLE HAVE NO ACCESS
TO CLEAN WATER TO DRINK.
BACTERIAL, VIRAL AND
GASTROINTESTINAL INFECTIONS
ARE VERY COMMON HERE.
>>IT'S IRONIC THAT THOUGH THE
AMAZON CARRIES MORE FRESH WATER
THAN THE COMBINED CAPACITY OF
THE NEXT EIGHT LARGEST RIVERS
ON EARTH, PEOPLE
WHO LIVE ON ITS BANKS
DON'T HAVE CLEAN
WATER TO DRINK.
YET THE RIVER ITSELF
IS LARGELY TO BLAME
FOR THE AMAZON FLOODS AND
CHANGES COURSE SO DRAMATICALLY
IT CAN'T BE RELIED UPON TO
PROVIDE A PIPED WATER SUPPLY.
IN THE LAST FEW YEARS,
THE RIVER HAS MOVED AWAY
FROM THE CENTER
OF IQUITOS.
WHAT WAS DEEP WATER ONE YEAR
BECAME DRY RIVER BED THE NEXT.
BUT WHERE HUMANS STRUGGLE TO
COPE, NATURE HAS NO PROBLEM.
AS IT LEAVES IQUITOS, FLOWING
FROM PERU INTO BRAZIL,
THE AMAZON RUNS MORE OR
LESS PARALLEL WITH THE EQUATOR
WHERE THE EARTH RECEIVES
MAXIMUM ENERGY FROM THE SUN.
UNDER THESE CONDITIONS
WILDLIFE THRIVES
IN MANY
SPECIALIZED FORMS.
THE AMAZON'S FLOODING
CREATES A UNIQUE ENVIRONMENT
TO WHICH NATURE ADAPTS IN
THE MOST REMARKABLE WAY.
THE FLOODED FORESTS
ARE A GREAT EXAMPLE.
THESE WATER-LOGGED JUNGLES
OCCUPY SWATHS OF LAND
UP TO 20 KILOMETERS
EITHER SIDE OF THE RIVER.
DURING THE WET SEASON, THE SOIL
IN WHICH THESE PLANTS GROW
IS UNDERWATER.
THE SMALLER TREES ARE
COMPLETELY SUBMERGED.
TO SURVIVE, THEY GROW
ROOTS UP TO 20 METERS LONG,
ANCHORING THEMSELVES AGAINST
THE FORCE OF THE FLOODS.
SOME TREES EVEN GROW NEW
ROOTS, REACHING DOWN FROM
THEIR BRANCHES TO ABSORB
NUTRIENTS FROM THE WATER.
WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT THE
WILDLIFE OF THE AMAZON
JUST SCRATCHES
THE SURFACE.
THE AREA COVERED BY THE RIVER
BASIN IS SO VAST THAT THERE ARE
STILL TRIBUTARIES WHICH HAVE YET
TO BE EXPLORED AND THOUSANDS
OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS
WHICH ARE UN-CATALOGUED.
SCIENTISTS ARE CONTINUALLY
WORKING TO UNDERSTAND
THE EXTREMELY COMPLEX
ECOSYSTEM OF THIS REGION.
ONE OF THE AMAZON'S MANY
WILDLIFE RESEARCH PROJECTS
IS BASED HERE, AT
THE PIRANHA RESERVE
IN THE MIDDLE REACHES
OF THE AMAZON.
WORKING FROM A
FLOATING LABORATORY,
MARIA SOARES IS DIRECTOR
OF THE OPERATION.
TRANSLATOR: WE MEASURE
AND WEIGH THE FISH.
FIRST WE WEIGH IT, THEN WE
MEASURE IT AND REMOVE THE
STOMACH SO WE HAVE AN IDEA
WHAT ITS FEEDING HABITS ARE.
THIS INFORMATION IS VERY
IMPORTANT AS THE MAIN AIM
OF THE PROJECT IS TO
COMPILE AND TO COMPARE DATA.
THE PIRANHA RESERVE IS HOME
TO A HUGE VARIETY OF FISH
PERFECTLY ADAPTED TO LIVING
IN THIS UNDERWATER JUNGLE.
TRANSLATOR: DURING THE FLOOD
SEASON LOTS OF TREES PRODUCE
VARIOUS TYPES OF FRUIT WHICH
PROVIDE AN EXCELLENT SOURCE
OF NOURISHMENT FOR THE
MANY SPECIES OF FISH.
HERE, FOR EXAMPLE,
IS A TEROUMA FRUIT
IN THE STOMACH
OF A SARDINE.
IT'S A LONG SARDINE, A
SPECIES OF THE CLUPEIDAE
AND IT'S A SMART FISH
FOR EATING TEROUMA.
TEROUMA IS A
VERY TASTY FRUIT.
EVEN PEOPLE
CAN EAT IT.
IT'S SWEET AND TASTY AND THE
TREE ITSELF IS ALSO BEAUTIFUL.
>>IN THIS SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIP
THE TREES ALSO BENEFIT AS THE
FISH DISTRIBUTE THEIR FRUIT
SEEDS IN THEIR DROPPINGS.
THE FISH SUPPORTED BY THE RIVER
ARE A CRUCIAL FOOD SOURCE
FOR THE RIBERENOS WHO
LIVE ON PIRANHA RESERVE.
IN RETURN FOR PROTECTED
FISHING RIGHTS, THEY SHARE
THEIR LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
WITH THE RESEARCHERS,
HELPING THEM TRACK
THE MIGRATORY PATHS
OF FISH AND IDENTIFYING
NEW SPECIES.
IT'S PRICELESS INFORMATION IN
A PLACE WHERE ONLY A FRACTION
OF THE WILDLIFE HAS BEEN
SCIENTIFICALLY DOCUMENTED.
TRANSLATOR: IN THE AMAZON
BASIN THERE ARE CURRENTLY
2,000 MUSEUM
CATALOGUED SPECIES.
BUT WE CAN CONSERVATIVELY
ESTIMATE THAT THERE ARE
IN FACT SOME
3,000 SPECIES.
WHY IS THIS A
CONSERVATIVE ESTIMATE?
BECAUSE THERE ARE STILL A LOT
OF NARROW RIVER CHANNELS
AND RIVER POOLS THAT
HAVE NOT YET BEEN SURVEYED.
>>WORKING IN COLLABORATION WITH
LOCAL PEOPLE, RESEARCH PROJECTS
LIKE THIS ONE DISCOVER SOME 50
NEW SPECIES OF FISH EVERY YEAR.
THE KNOWLEDGE GAINED HELPS THE
RIBERENOS BOTH EXPLOIT AND
PROTECT THE ECOSYSTEM UPON
WHICH THEIR LIVELIHOOD DEPENDS.
THERE IS ONE ANIMAL,
HOWEVER, THAT THE RIBERENOS
DARE NOT HUNT, THE
LEGENDARY BOTO DOLPHIN.
UP TO THREE METERS LONG
AND WEIGHING SOME 90 KILOS,
THE BOTO VARY IN COLOR
FROM GRAY TO PINK.
WITH A BRAIN 40% LARGER THAN
HUMANS THEY ARE SUPREMELY
INTELLIGENT AND
NATURALLY PLAYFUL.
JUAR DI LIBRE IS A
FISHERMAN WHO'S HAD
MANY A CLOSE ENCOUNTER
WITH THE BOTO.
TRANSLATOR: IF A DOLPHIN
THINKS YOU'RE AFRAID OF IT,
LOTS MORE DOLPHINS
WILL TURN UP
AND THEY WILL TRY
AND TEASE YOU.
IF YOU'RE IN A SMALL CANOE,
SMALLER THAN THIS ONE,
THEY'LL TRY
AND DROWN YOU.
>>THE DOLPHINS'
MISCHIEVOUS NATURE
HAS FUELED ALL
KINDS OF LOCAL MYTHS.
RUMOR HAS IT, AT NIGHT THE
BOTO EMERGE FROM THE RIVER
TO COURT
LOCAL WOMEN.
TRANSLATOR: YES,
IT APPEARS LIKE ME,
LIKE ME IN THE FORM OF
A MALE, A PHYSICAL BODY.
IT APPROACHES WOMEN AND,
BELIEVE ME THIS IS TRUE,
IT REALLY HAPPENS; EVEN
HERE IT HAS HAPPENED.
OFTEN THEY TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
WOMEN WHEN THEY'RE VULNERABLE.
>>THOUGH THEY'RE NOT REALLY ABLE
TO WALK ON LAND, THESE DOLPHINS
HAVE EVOLVED PERFECTLY
TO SUIT THEIR ENVIRONMENT.
PRACTICALLY BLIND, SINCE
THERE'S NOT MUCH TO SEE IN THE
MURKY WATERS, THEY HUNT THEIR
PREY WITH SONAR DETECTORS
AND HAVE A FLEXIBLE
BACKBONE TO WEAVE THEIR WAY
THROUGH UNDERWATER
VEGETATION.
THE AMAZON DOLPHINS ARE NOT THE
ONLY RIVER DOLPHINS IN THE WORLD
BUT THEY ARE ONE OF THE FEW
TYPES THAT ARE THRIVING,
PROTECTED BY THE
UNTAMED RIVER.
IN THE REMOTE PIRANHA RESERVE,
THE BOTO AND THE FISHERMEN
HAVE DEVELOPED
AN UNDERSTANDING.
BUT ELSEWHERE ON THE AMAZON,
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
IS PLACING ANIMALS AND
HUMANS IN DIRECT CONFLICT.
SOME 4,000 KILOMETERS
DOWNSTREAM OF ITS SOURCE,
THE AMAZON APPROACHES ITS
LARGEST TRIBUTARY CONFLUENCE.
HERE THE DARK AND CLEAR
WATERS OF THE RIO NEGRO
JOIN THE MUDDY
FLOW OF THE AMAZON.
FOR ELEVEN KILOMETERS THE
BLACK AND BROWN WATERS
FLOW SIDE BY SIDE
BEFORE FINALLY MINGLING
TO CREATE THE LARGEST
RIVER IN THE WORLD.
OVER EIGHT KILOMETERS
WIDE AND 100 METERS DEEP,
AT THIS POINT THE AMAZON
IS A TRADE SUPERHIGHWAY
ALONG WHICH PRODUCTS
CAN BE EXPORTED FROM
THE HEART OF THE
RAINFOREST DIRECTLY TO SEA.
UPSTREAM OF
THE CONFLUENCE,
THE CITY OF MANAUS IS
PERFECTLY POSITIONED
TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE
RIVER'S COMMERCIAL POTENTIAL.
TODAY MANAUS IS A TRADING
POINT FOR ALL KINDS OF CARGO.
IN THE EARLY 20TH CENTURY,
HOWEVER, RUBBER WAS THE
KEY COMMODITY TO BE EXPORTED
THROUGH THESE DOCKS.
TAPPED FROM THE RAINFOREST,
THE RUBBER WAS SHIPPED DOWN
THE AMAZON FROM MANAUS
TO ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD.
IN THOSE DAYS MANAUS WAS KNOWN
AS THE "PARIS OF THE TROPICS".
THE RUINED OLD BUILDINGS IN THE
CITY CENTER ARE A REMINDER OF
THE IMMENSE WEALTH WHICH
RUBBER ONCE BROUGHT.
BUT THE GLORY DAYS
WERE SHORT LIVED.
IN LESS THAN 30 YEARS THE
AMAZON RUBBER INDUSTRY
WENT BUST AS RIVAL
PLANTATIONS OPENED IN ASIA
AND SYNTHETIC RUBBER
BECAME AVAILABLE.
TO HELP MANAUS REINVENT ITSELF,
THE BRAZILIAN GOVERNMENT
HAVE DECLARED IT
A DUTY FREE ZONE.
CONSIGNMENTS IN AND OUT
OF THE CITY ARE TAX EXEMPT,
ENCOURAGING INTERNATIONAL
INVESTORS TO SET UP HERE.
TODAY, BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS WORTH OF GOODS
ENTER AND LEAVE
MANAUS EVERY YEAR.
THIS COMMERCE
ATTRACTS THOUSANDS
OF NEW MIGRANTS
TO THE CITY,
ALL HOPING TO SHARE IN THE
WEALTH WHICH THE RIVER BRINGS.
TO ACCOMMODATE THE
GROWTH, MANAUS' CITY LIMITS
ARE EXPANDING
FURTHER AND FURTHER
INTO THE SURROUNDING
RAINFOREST,
ENCROACHING ON THE
WILDERNESS AND ITS WILDLIFE.
ONE OF THE MOST COMMON
ANIMALS HERE ARE CAYMANS,
CROCODILIAN REPTILES
UNIQUE TO THE AMAZON.
IN THE 1980'S CAYMANS WERE
AN ENDANGERED SPECIES
BUT A PROJECT
TO SAVE THEM
HAS LED TO AN EXPLOSION
IN THEIR NUMBERS.
SOME BELIEVE SEVERAL
MILLION CAYMANS NOW LIVE
ALONG THE AMAZON,
OUTNUMBERING AND
POSING A REAL DANGER TO
THE HUMAN POPULATION.
FOR THOSE WHO MAKE A LIVING ON
THE WATER, THE RISKS ARE DEADLY.
ALDOSAMIR CARDOSA IS A
FISHERMAN WHO WAS ATTACKED
BY A CAYMAN A
FEW YEARS AGO.
TRANSLATOR: AS I WAS REMOVING
THE FISH AND SORTING THEM OUT
I DIDN'T PAY ATTENTION TO
THIS SIDE AND THE CAYMAN
JUMPED ABOUT A METER
HIGH STRAIGHT AT ME.
HE WAS AIMING FOR MY HEAD AND
SO I SAW THAT IT WAS AN ANIMAL.
I WAS ABLE TO MOVE MY HEAD
THIS WAY AND THREW UP MY ARM.
IT GRABBED MY ARM
AND FLOODED THE BOAT.
IT WAS HEAVY AND
FIVE METERS LONG
AND IT STARTED
TO DRAG ME AWAY.
>>IN THE 20 MINUTE
STRUGGLE THAT FOLLOWED
THE CAYMAN TRIED TO DRAG
ALDOSAMIR UNDER WATER
BY HIS ARM.
TRANSLATOR: IT
BROKE IN FOUR PARTS.
THIS JOINT WAS
SEVERED HERE.
THIS FINGER
WAS SEVERED.
IT WAS ONLY
ATTACHED HERE.
>>ONLY BY PLAYING DEAD
DID ALDOSAMIR GET AWAY
WITH HIS LIFE.
BUT IT'S NOT JUST FISHERMEN
WHO ARE NOW AT RISK...
FOR AS THE NUMBER OF CAYMANS
INCREASE AND AS MANAUS EXPANDS,
ANIMALS AND HUMANS
COMPETE FOR LIVING SPACE.
THE NARROW RIVER CANALS WHICH
FLOW THROUGH MANAUS' SUBURBS
ARE A GREAT EXAMPLE.
HERE, THE CAYMANS THRIVE
AMONG THE URBAN WASTE.
BUT MANY PEOPLE ALSO
LIVE NEXT TO THE CANALS.
IT'S A SITUATION WHICH IS
BOUND TO LEAD TO CONFLICT.
CYNTIA MARTEZ OWNS A
RESTAURANT WHICH BACKS ONTO
ONE OF THE MANY
RIVER CANALS.
SHE ARRIVED AT WORK
ONE MORNING TO FIND A
SURPRISE VISITOR
WAITING FOR HER.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN I ARRIVED AT
THE GATE THERE WAS A CAIMAN
ABOUT THREE
METERS LONG.
I WAS VERY FRIGHTENED
BECAUSE, IMAGINE, A CAYMAN.
I WAS VERY SCARED SO I
CALLED THE PEOPLE AT WORK
AND LIVE HERE TOO AND WE
WENT OVER THERE TO THE GATE
WITH A ROPE AND PUT
IT AROUND ITS MOUTH.
>>CYNTIA HAD TO TRY AND DRAG
THE CAYMAN BACK TO THE CANAL
FROM WHICH IT
HAD EMERGED.
TRANSLATOR: IT HAD
RAINED A LOT THAT NIGHT.
I THINK THE RIVER CANAL
FILLED UP AND IT CLIMBED OUT
AND WE HAD TO BUILD A WALL
SO THAT WE COULD FEEL SAFER.
>>BUT DEALING WITH THE LOCAL
WILDLIFE IS JUST ONE OF
THE CHALLENGES OF
URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
FOR AS ITS ECONOMIC
REVIVAL CONTINUES,
MANAUS' ELECTRICITY
NEEDS ARE ALSO INCREASING.
ONE OF THE GREATEST POTENTIAL
POWER SOURCES IN THE
ENTIRE AMAZON REGION
IS THE RIVER ITSELF.
IT'S A FORCE THAT DEVELOPERS
WOULD LOVE TO HARNESS,
PARTICULARLY IN BRAZIL, WHERE
80% OF ALL THE COUNTRY'S
ELECTRICITY IS CREATED
BY HYDRO POWER.
SO FAR THE AMAZON
HAS NOT BEEN DAMMED.
IT'S TOO BIG TO CONTROL
AND WITH A GRADIENT OF
LESS THAN 100 METERS
OVER MOST OF ITS COURSE,
IT'S JUST TOO SLOW TO
PRODUCE ELECTRICITY.
BUT MANY OF THE
HUNDREDS OF TRIBUTARIES
WHICH JOIN THE AMAZON
HAVE MUCH FASTER CURRENTS
AND IT'S THESE ARTERIES
WHICH ARE BEING CLAMPED
IN THE RACE TO
PRODUCE HYDRO POWER.
SOME 150 KILOMETERS
EAST OF MANAUS ON THE
UATUMA TRIBUTARY OF THE
AMAZON IS BALBINA DAM.
TODAY THE LAKE FORMED BY THE DAM
LOOKS BEAUTIFUL AND TRANQUIL
BUT IN THE 1980'S WHEN IT WAS
BUILT IT CAUSED SO MUCH
ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE THE
BALBINA WAS DUBBED ONE OF THE
GREATEST ERRORS EVER
COMMITTED IN THE AMAZON.
ITS STORY SOUNDS A TERRIBLE
WARNING OF THE DANGERS OF
DAMMING A RIVER IN
THE RAINFOREST.
BEFORE IT WAS BUILT THE
DEVELOPERS CLAIMED THAT
BALBINA WOULD FLOOD SOME
2,360 SQUARE KILOMETERS OF
RAINFOREST TO PRODUCE 250
MEGAWATTS OF ELECTRICITY,
MOST OF WHICH WOULD
BE FED TO MANAUS.
FROM THE OUTSET,
ENVIRONMENTALISTS WERE
CRITICAL OF HOW MUCH
JUNGLE WOULD BE LOST
TO PRODUCE SUCH MODEST
AMOUNTS OF POWER.
WHAT'S MORE, MANY
INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES
LIVED IN THE AREA WHICH
WAS TO BE FLOODED.
THEIR HOMES AND LIVELIHOODS
WOULD BE DESTROYED
WHEN THE WATERS ROSE.
AS OPPOSITION
REACHED FEVER PITCH
THE AUTHORITIES DECIDED TO END
THE DEBATE WITHOUT WARNING,
CLOSING THE FLOOD
GATES 30 DAYS EARLY.
THE EFFECTS
WERE CATASTROPHIC.
THE ENGINEERS GROSSLY
UNDERESTIMATED THE AREA
WHICH WOULD
BE SUBMERGED.
WHEN THE FLOOD GATES
CLOSED, THE WATER SPREAD OUT
EVERYWHERE OVER
THE FLAT LANDSCAPE.
ANIMALS AND HUMANS
FLED FOR THEIR LIVES.
ELIDIO DE SILVAS IS ONE
OF THE LOCAL PEOPLE
WHO WITNESSED
THE CARNAGE.
TRANSLATOR: MOST OF THE
ANIMALS THAT WERE KILLED
AT THAT TIME
WERE MONKEYS.
THE MONKEYS DIED
BECAUSE IN THIS LARGE AREA,
AS YOU CAN SEE, THERE
WEREN'T MANY ISLANDS LEFT.
>>AS HE WATCHED TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF ANIMALS DROWN,
ELIDIO JOINED A DESPERATE
MISSION TO RESCUE
AS MANY AS POSSIBLE.
TRANSLATOR: WE WENT OUT
TO COLLECT THE ANIMALS,
TO MOVE THEM TO THE
HIGHER LAND TO SAVE THEM.
WE COULD ONLY
SAVE A FEW.
MANY MORE DIED MAINLY BECAUSE
WE DIDN'T HAVE ENOUGH BOATS
TO COLLECT ALL
THE ANIMALS.
>>NOT ONLY WAS THE HABITAT
DESTROYED, SO TOO WAS THE WATER.
FOR IN THE HASTE
TO FILL THE DAM,
THE AREA HAD NOT BEEN
CLEARED OF JUNGLE.
AS THE TREES ROTTED DOWN,
THE RESERVOIR BECAME
SLICK WITH SCUM,
KILLING THE FISH
AND POISONING THE
LOCAL DRINKING SUPPLY.
TRANSLATOR: THE WATER WAS
SO BAD WE COULDN'T DRINK IT
SO THE COMPANY PROVIDED
SOME WATER WELLS
BUT THEY WEREN'T
PROPER WELLS.
IT WAS JUST A GESTURE TO
KEEP THE PEOPLE HAPPY.
>>AS THE WATER PUMPS ALSO
BEGAN TO DRAW TOXIC WATER,
THE RESIDENTS OF OLD
BALBINA WERE RELOCATED
TO A PURPOSE-BUILT
VILLAGE ON HIGHER LAND.
HERE THEY REMAIN TODAY,
SURROUNDED BY MODERN
AMENITIES BUT DEPRIVED OF
THEIR TRADITIONAL WAY OF LIFE.
IN THE NEW BALBINA UNEMPLOYMENT
AND ALCOHOLISM ARE HIGH.
DESPITE THE LESSONS OF
BALBINA THERE ARE MANY
MORE DAMS PLANNED
FOR THE AMAZON BASIN
AS SOUTH AMERICA'S
ENERGY DEMANDS INCREASE.
BUT IN RECENT YEARS THE REGION
HAS SEEN DRAMATIC CHANGES IN
CLIMATE WHICH THREATEN TO PUT A
HALT TO ALL HYDRO POWER PLANS.
DOWNSTREAM OF MANAUS WHERE
THE RIO NEGRO AND AMAZON MEET,
CATALAO IS ONE OF THE MANY LAKES
FORMED BY THE ROAMING WATERS.
THOUGH THEY HAVE NO RUNNING
WATER OR ELECTRICITY,
THE COMMUNITY WHICH
LIVES HERE ARE USED TO
COPING WITH LIFE
ON THE RIVER.
EVERY HOUSE IN THE VILLAGE
IS DESIGNED TO FLOAT.
EVEN THE BUILDERS
HERE WORK ON WATER.
BUT IN 2005 LIFE CHANGED
IN A WAY THESE VILLAGERS
COULD NEVER
HAVE IMAGINED.
IN THE SUMMER OF THAT YEAR THE
AMAZON SUFFERED THE WORST
DROUGHT ON RECORD,
WREAKING HAVOC IN THE REGION.
ON LAKE CATALAO, THE
RESIDENTS FOUND THEMSELVES
TOTALLY ISOLATED.
RAMUNDA VIANA REMEMBERS THE
EFFECT IT HAD ON THE COMMUNITY.
TRANSLATOR: FOR US THE
SITUATION WAS A DISASTER.
THERE WAS A LOT OF HUNGER
BECAUSE THE FISH DIED.
THE FLOATING HOUSES WERE
STRANDED, THERE WAS NO WATER
AND WE HAD TO WALK
TO GET TO THE RIVER.
WE HAD TO CARRY
WATER ON OUR HEADS
AND BRING IT BACK FOR
WASHING AND DRINKING.
>> THE VILLAGERS
BECAME DESPERATE
AS THE SHRINKING WATERS
FILLED WITH DYING FISH.
WHEN THEIR FOOD AND WATER
SUPPLY WAS DWINDLED TO NOTHING,
THE PEOPLE CONGREGATED
EVERY DAY AT THE CHURCH
TO PRAY FOR AN END
TO THEIR SUFFERING.
TRANSLATOR: SO WE BEGGED GOD TO
SEND RAIN AND WHEN THE RAIN CAME
PEOPLE WOULD BE BY THE
GUTTER COLLECTING THE WATER
IN LITTLE BOWLS FROM THE GUTTER
JUST FOR SOMETHING TO DRINK
AND TO AVOID CARRYING
THE WATER IN THE HOT SUN.
>>THE SITUATION WAS THE
SAME ALL OVER THE AMAZON.
RIVER WATERS RECEDED SO FAR
THAT BOATS BECAME STRANDED.
THERE WERE EVEN STORIES
OF FISH BEING COOKED ALIVE
IN THE HEAT OF THE
SHALLOW WATERS.
AS THE RIVER DRIED UP,
THE JUNGLE SUFFERED TOO.
TRANSFORMED FROM WET
SPONGE TO TINDER BOX,
AN AREA MORE THAN 1,000
KILOMETERS SQUARE
WAS LOST TO
FOREST FIRES.
THE SMOKE PROLONGED
THE CRISIS, INHIBITING THE
FORMATION OF CLOUDS AND
MAKING THE DROUGHT WORSE.
WHEN THEIR PRAYERS WERE
ANSWERED AND THE RAINS
EVENTUALLY ARRIVED, THE
PEOPLE OF THE AMAZON
ASSUMED THE DROUGHT OF 2005
WAS A ONCE IN A LIFETIME EVENT.
BUT A YEAR LATER THE
DROUGHTS RETURNED.
AS A PATTERN EMERGES, SCIENTISTS
ARE BEGINNING TO QUESTION
WHY THIS RIVER IS SUFFERING
SUCH UNPRECEDENTED CHANGE.
MANY BLAME DEFORESTATION FOR
THE INCREASING DROUGHTS.
TREES ARE THE WATER TOWERS OF
THE AMAZON, DRAWING MOISTURE
FROM THE GROUND AND RELEASING
IT INTO THE ATMOSPHERE
UNTIL IT EVENTUALLY
FALLS AGAIN AS RAIN.
BUT AN AREA OF JUNGLE THE
SIZE OF SIX FOOTBALL PITCHES
IS CUT DOWN EVERY MINUTE,
DESTROYING THE WATER CYCLE
WHICH IS THE LIFELINE
OF THIS REGION.
WHAT'S MORE, THE BURNING OF
FORESTS IS INCREASING GLOBAL
WARMING AND THE LIKELIHOOD
OF FURTHER DROUGHTS.
FOR THOUGH THE TREES OF THE
AMAZON PRODUCE MORE THAN 20%
OF THE OXYGEN ON EARTH,
DEFORESTATION FIRES ARE NOW
RESPONSIBLE FOR A QUARTER OF
ALL GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS.
FOR THE RIVER THE CRISIS
IS EVEN MORE IMMEDIATE
AS MOST OF ITS WATER
COMES FROM PRECIPITATION.
WITHOUT RAIN
FROM THE RAINFOREST,
THE AMAZON AS WE KNOW
IT WOULD CEASE TO EXIST.
AND THE FURTHER THE RIVER
CONTINUES ON ITS EASTWARD
COURSE, THE GREATER
THE THREAT BECOMES.
TWO HUNDRED KILOMETERS
DOWN STREAM OF MANAUS
IS THE CITY
OF SANTAREM.
POSITIONED AT THE CONFLUENCE OF
THE TAPAJOS AND AMAZON RIVERS
AND FED BY THOUSANDS OF
KILOMETERS OF JUNGLE HIGHWAY,
SANTAREM IS A VITAL
EXPORT TERMINAL
FOR RAINFOREST
PRODUCTS.
FROM THE CITY DOCKS IT'S A
STRAIGHT 1,300 KILOMETERS
ALONG THE AMAZON
RIVER TO SEA.
OF ALL THE CARGO PROCESSED HERE
THE MOST PROFITABLE IS SOYA.
SHIPS LADEN WITH SOYA
BEANS SAIL FROM SANTAREM
DIRECTLY TO EUROPE
AND THE UNITED STATES
WHERE THE SOYA IS
USED TO FEED ANIMALS
DESTINED FOR THE SUPERMARKET
AND FAST FOOD CHAINS.
BUT THIS SEEMINGLY INERT
CARGO POSES A DEADLY THREAT
TO THE AMAZON
AND TO THE PEOPLE.
FOR SOYA IS NOW THE MAIN
ENGINE OF DEFORESTATION
IN THE WHOLE REGION.
1,200,000 ACRES OF PRIME
RAINFOREST HAVE BEEN
CUT DOWN TO MAKE
WAY FOR THE CROP.
MUCH OF THE JUNGLE
BEING CLEARED IS HOME TO
INDIGENOUS TRIBES AND
TRADITIONAL COMMUNITIES.
BUT THE MASSIVE PROFITS TO
BE MADE MEAN THAT SOME
DEVELOPERS WILL STOP AT NOTHING
TO GET THEIR HANDS ON NEW LAND.
THOSE WHO STAND IN THEIR WAY
RISK BEING GUNNED DOWN.
IT'S A FACT WHICH MARIA DOS
SANTOS KNOWS ONLY TOO WELL.
AS PRESIDENT OF
THE WORKERS UNION,
SHE HAS RECEIVED
SEVERAL DEATH THREATS
FOR DEFENDING THE
RIGHTS OF LOCAL FARMERS
AGAINST THE
SOYA MAGNATES.
FOR THE LAST TWO YEARS
SHE'S BEEN PROTECTED BY
24-HOUR ARMED GUARD.
TRANSLATOR: WHAT MOVES ME
IS KNOWING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SLOWLY GETTING
THEIR RIGHTS.
IT'S ABOUT
FACING, FIGHTING.
MAYBE IT WOULDN'T
BE DANGEROUS
IF WE DIDN'T WANT TO FACE
THE ENEMY, BUT WE DECIDED
THIS WAS THE APPROACH
THE UNION WOULD TAKE.
>>SOYA IS A RELATIVELY
NEW THREAT TO THE AMAZON.
THE BIGGEST CAUSE OF
DEFORESTATION USED TO BE
LOGGING AND
CATTLE RANCHING.
RECENTLY, HOWEVER,
DEVELOPERS REALIZED
THAT THE VAST TRACTS
OF LAND AVAILABLE HERE
WERE IDEAL FOR THE
PRODUCTION OF SOYA
WHICH IS ONLY PROFITABLE
WHEN GROWN IN HUGE QUANTITIES.
THE FIRST REGION TO BE
EXPLOITED WAS MATO GROSSO
IN THE FAR SOUTH.
BUT IT WAS ONLY A MATTER OF
TIME BEFORE THE SOYA MAGNATES
ARRIVED IN SANTAREM.
TRANSLATOR: BY 1999 OR 2000 WE'D
ALREADY HEARD THAT THEY WERE
ON THEIR WAY, THAT THE
SOYA FARMERS WOULD ARRIVE
IN OUR REGION. SOME PEOPLE
TRIED TO EXPLAIN IT TO US,
BUT WE NEVER REALLY
KNEW WHAT IT MEANT.
WE DIDN'T PREPARE
OURSELVES FOR THIS.
>>THE MOST OBVIOUS SYMBOL
OF SOYA'S ARRIVAL IN SANTAREM
WAS THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE
PRIVATELY OWNED EXPORT STATION
NEXT TO THE CITY DOCKS.
BUILT WITHOUT PLANNING
PERMISSION, THE LEGALITY
OF THIS STATION IS STILL
BEING DEBATED IN THE COURTS.
THE FIRST SANTAREM'S RESIDENTS
KNEW OF IT WAS WHEN THE CITY
BEACH WAS SUDDENLY REPLACED BY
AN IMMENSE INDUSTRIAL PLATFORM.
SOON AFTER, HOWEVER,
THE IMPLICATIONS HIT HOME
AS LOCAL FARMERS WERE
FORCED TO SELL THEIR LAND
TO THE MORE UNSCRUPULOUS
SOYA MAGNATES.
SINCE MOST RURAL WORKERS
HAVE NO DOCUMENTS TO PROVE
THEY OWN THEIR FARMS, MAKING
THEM SELL WAS RELATIVELY EASY.
TRANSLATOR: SO THEY
WOULD REGISTER THE LAND
AND THEN THEY'D SAY TO
THE PEOPLE LIVING ON IT,
LOOK, NOW WE HAVE
THIS DOCUMENTATION,
EITHER YOU ACCEPT OUR OFFER
OR YOU LEAVE WITH NOTHING.
THEY THREATENED TO CALL THE
POLICE SO THE FARMERS WOULD
ACCEPT SOME $5,000 OR
$10,000, IN IGNORANCE.
THEY'D EVEN SAY TO HIM,
LOOK, YOU CAN GO TO THE CITY
AND BUY A HOUSE THERE AND
YOU'LL HAVE A BETTER LIFE.
YOU CAN WATCH TV AND
LEAVE THIS WILDERNESS
WHICH HAS NO
ELECTRICITY.
AND SO THE PEOPLE
WOULD FALL FOR THIS CON.
>>MANY OF THE RURAL
MIGRANTS COME HERE
TO SANTAREM'S
SHANTY TOWN SUBURBS.
BUT THEY SOON REALIZED THAT
$10,000 DOES NOT GO VERY FAR
IN THE CITY.
IN THE COUNTRYSIDE THEY
COULD GROW THEIR OWN CROPS
FOR FOOD AND PROFIT,
WHEREAS HERE THEY HAVE
NOTHING TO
CREATE AN INCOME.
THESE BACK STREETS ARE FULL
OF DESPERATE FAMILIES WHO HAVE
LOST EVERYTHING TO THE
GREED OF THE SOYA INDUSTRY.
THESE ARE THE KIND OF
PEOPLE MARIA TRIES TO HELP.
AMONG THEM IS A WOMAN WHO
DOESN'T WANT TO BE IDENTIFIED
FOR FEAR OF HER LIFE.
FIVE YEARS AGO SHE AND HER
HUSBAND FLED TO THE CITY
WHEN THEIR RURAL VILLAGE
WAS BURNED TO THE GROUND
BY GUERILLAS WORKING ON
BEHALF OF THE SOYA MAGNATES.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN WE GOT TO THE
CITY GOD GAVE US THIS PLACE
AND THE PEOPLE
HERE HELPED US.
THIS HUT WAS BUILT
BY THE PEOPLE.
>>AFTER REACHING THE CITY,
HOWEVER, HER HUSBAND TOOK PART
IN A COMPENSATION CLAIM
AGAINST THE SOYA FARMERS.
NOW HE HAS A
PRICE ON HIS HEAD.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN I USED TO WALK
THROUGH THE CITY PEOPLE WOULD
SAY TO ME "THEY ARE MAKING
PLANS TO KILL YOUR HUSBAND".
I WAS IN SUCH A STATE THAT
I COULDN'T EAT ANYMORE.
WHEN MY HUSBAND CAME HERE I
ASKED HIM TO STOP EVERYTHING.
THE POOR CAN'T CHALLENGE
THE RICH BECAUSE THE RICH
HAVE MONEY TO
KILL PEOPLE.
"YOU MIGHT AS WELL ALREADY BE
DEAD", I USED TO SAY TO HIM.
>>FOR MARIA AND FOR
THE PEOPLE OF SANTAREM,
THE FIGHT FOR
JUSTICE CONTINUES.
MEANWHILE, THE THREAT
FROM SOYA IS INCREASING.
SEVERAL NEW ROADS ARE PLANNED
IN THE AMAZON WHICH WILL
CUT THROUGH THE RAINFOREST,
ESTABLISHING NEW TRADE ROUTES
AND OPENING NEW
AREAS TO DEVELOPMENT.
IN ALL THIS, THE RIVER
CONTINUES TO BE
THE MOST VITAL LINK OF
THE EXPORT CORRIDOR.
FROM SANTAREM THE HEAVILY
LADEN SHIPS CONTINUE
EASTWARDS FOR
ANOTHER 1,300 KILOMETERS
BEFORE THE AMAZON
FINALLY MEETS THE OCEAN.
MORE THAN 240 KILOMETERS
WIDE, THE RIVER ENTERS THE SEA
WITH SUCH POWER THAT IT
PUSHES THE SALT WATER BACK
HUNDREDS OF
KILOMETERS FROM LAND.
IN THE INCREDIBLE FORCE OF THIS
FLOW, THE SOYA AND OTHER
PRODUCTS OF THE RAINFOREST
ARE CARRIED AWAY TO MARKET.
BUT IN FORMING A PART OF
THE COMMERCIAL CHAIN,
THE RIVER IS A TOOL OF
ITS OWN DESTRUCTION.
FOR THE RAINFOREST AND THE
RIVER ARE INTERDEPENDENT.
WHAT DESTROYS ONE WILL
UNDOUBTEDLY DESTROY THE OTHER.
TODAY, THE AMAZON RIVER
STILL CARRIES ONE-FIFTH
OF ALL THE WORLD'S
FRESH WATER.
FOR THE PEOPLE
WHO LIVE NEAR IT,
THE RIVER STILL DICTATES
THE PLACE AND PACE OF LIFE.
BUT IT'S CLEAR THAT THE
AMAZON CAN NO LONGER
ESCAPE THE INFLUENCES
OF THE MODERN WORLD.
FOR HOW LONG THE LAST
GREAT UNTAMED RIVER ON EARTH
WILL CONTINUE TO RUN
WILD REMAINS TO BE SEEN.